[music]
Whether food, drugs, or ideas, what you
consume influences is who you become. On
the Mind and Matter podcast, we learned
together from the best scientists and
thinkers alive today about how your mind
body reacts to what you feed it. Before
starting Mind and Matter, I spent 10
years in academia doing scientific
research. I got a PhD in neuroscience
where I focused on neuroendocrinology
and the neurobiology of behavior. And
before that, I specialized in molecular,
developmental, and evolutionary
genetics. I use my scientific background
to help parse and translate the
information that guests share on the
podcast. In addition to the podcast, I
write long- form written content
inspired by the show where I integrate
what I've learned across episodes. I
also have a free weekly newsletter where
I provide you with upcoming guests,
share links, and provide commentary on
scientific studies and research that I'm
reading and more. Visit mind and
matter.substack.com
to find all of my content. You are about
to listen to the full episode, but there
will be one to two short ads immediately
following this before the conversation.
If you would like to hear adfree
episodes and get early access before
they release more widely, become a paid
subscriber at the Mindand Matter
Substack at mind and matter.stack.com.
Becoming a paid subscriber is a way to
directly support my efforts, allowing me
to make more episodes and higher quality
episodes, and also helping to free up my
time so that I can spend more of it on
doing research and synthesizing results
from the podcast and from the literature
so that I can do more things like
writing on the Substack, putting more
content into the newsletter, and getting
these things out more frequently. So, if
you want to support the show and get ad
free episodes, go to
mindandmatter.substack.com.
Hey everyone, I want to take just a
minute to tell you about a really cool
health monitoring device I've been using
called Lumen. It's a handheld
pocket-size device with a sleek design.
The Lumen device measures CO2 levels in
your breath, which allows their
technology to determine the extent to
which your body is burning fats versus
carbohydrates. Lumen helps improve your
metabolic flexibility, your body's
efficiency in shifting between using
fats and carbs for energy. I use this
device in the morning or before bed or
after meals or after workouts to track
my metabolism. With just a couple weeks
of use, I learned a lot about which
foods were causing my body to burn
mostly fat, mostly carbs, or both, as
well as how long I needed to fast and
how hard I needed to exercise to promote
fat burning. Being able to track whether
your body is burning fat versus carbs
will help you figure out how your body
responds to your lifestyle and whether
or not your weight loss and fitness
strategies are actually working. Lumen
is great for anyone looking to optimize
their health for either weight loss or
athletic performance. Their easytouse
app allows you to track your results
together with what you're eating and how
you're exercising, and it syncs with
other devices like the Apple Watch.
Click the link in the episode
description to learn more. And use the
code mind matter, m i n d m a t er, to
get 10% off your Lumen device today.
That's on top of the sitewide sale they
are currently running. And the Lumen
device is eligible to be paid for with
FSA and HSA health accounts. Check out
the link in the episode description for
more info.
[music]
Thomas, thank you for joining me.
>> Well, thank you very much. It's a
pleasure to be here. Nick, can you start
off by just telling everyone a little
bit about who you are and what your
background is?
>> Yeah, thank you. Um, I'm a professor of
biology at Boston College in Chestnut
Hill, Massachusetts.
I currently teach cancer uh metabolism.
Cancer is a metabolic disease. I teach
general biology to the non- majors
uh going over fundamental aspects of
evolutionary biology and and
biochemistry as well. And uh we focus uh
um um on um maintaining or improving um
scientific literacy which seems to be uh
very in in very short supply
uh and among members of our of our
society. So uh we we try to improve uh
understanding of becoming more
scientifically literate and being able
to interpret uh information. So I I
teach those classes and we've been I've
been here at BC for almost 49 years uh
uh 40 years actually and um pretty much
running my own research program for all
these years uh on a variety of different
uh backgrounds epilepsy bio lipid
biochemistry
uh cancer metabolism and now
predominantly cancer metabolism. Mhm.
And let's just start out with with some
basics around cancer. Can you just give
us a a good definition for what cancer
is? What characterizes cancer cells as
opposed to other cells? And what I'm
interested in here besides the
definition too is do you have a
definition that differs at all from what
we might call the orthodox definition
you might find in a textbook?
>> No, I I think the definition in the
textbooks are what everybody would agree
upon. And that definition is cell
division out of control or disregulated
cell growth.
>> The the controversies and the
discussions are on what is the origin of
that and and how you manage that. So um
uh but the definition is pretty well um
accepted throughout the scientific uh
communities. Cell division out of
control uh disregulated cell growth is
what is generally referred to as cancer.
Mhm. [clears throat] So, so cycle has
been disrupted somehow. The cells are
growing in a disregulated fashion.
There's no [snorts] disagreement on
that. That's that is what cancer is. Um,
it's pretty intuitive, too. I think the
average person gets that, you know, well
enough. But there's definitely different
ideas out there around what's causing
that dysregulation to begin with.
>> Yeah, that's right. That's that's where
the uh main discussions
and controversies are today as to what
is the origin of the disregulated cell
growth. How does that how does that
happen? What what would induce a
population of cells in a particular
organ uh to begin a proliferation
that is no longer regulated. Mhm.
>> Um you know we we do in our normal cells
uh normal tissues we have cells that
will divide uh a grow and replace other
cells that have been worn out and
degraded from age and wear wear and
tear. Um probably the biggest or one of
the most interesting aspects of normal
cell division uh is regenerating
[snorts] liver. uh a a lobe of the liver
can be taken off uh either an animal or
a human and you can get uh massive rapid
regrowth um and replace the a large
number of cells that were removed in the
lobe and that that's rapid cell division
under control. It's not disregulated
control. They the cells know when to
stop. uh they don't continue to grow as
opposed to a hepatoma which is a cancer
of one of the cells in the liver uh that
has disregulated growth. Um those cells
do not they no longer respond to the
inhibitory signals that the cells in a
regenerating liver uh would uh would
have. So we have cell divisions that
occur naturally in different organs. the
gut, the crypt cells of the gut, uh all
of these all of these normal cells are
are dividing. They have cell division,
but in contrast to cancer, uh the those
cell divisions are under control and
where cancer cells are out of control.
>> So out of control or disregulated
doesn't merely mean that the cells are
growing quickly because as you said, we
we've got cells that divide quickly um
in different parts of the body. That
happens, [snorts] but it's happening in
a regulated fashion. They know when to
grow. They know how fast to grow. And
even if they're growing quickly, it's
done uh as it's supposed to be done.
It's done in a regulated fashion. And
it's only when somehow someway the cell
cycle controls on that division get
disrupted that things become cancerous.
>> Yes, that's right. And so when I like I
remember very clearly being a biology
student all the way back in high school,
college, and so forth. I never studied
cancer in the lab. So my exposure was
just in the textbooks and in the
classroom but I remember very clearly
being told um that you know we sort of
knew how cancer arose and that that is
well you know we we we've got the genome
the genome contains the full suite of
genes um every cell's got a
[clears throat] a genome inside of it
the nuclear DNA and there are tumor
suppressor genes and there are ankco
genes so these are genes that encode
things that somehow someway are tied
into the regulation of cell cycle And
when you acquire multiple mutations in
certain genes, anka genes promoting
cancer, tumor suppressor genes
suppressing cancer, um if you get some
combination of mutations in these types
of genes, then you will get cancer. And
that is how we get cancer. That was that
was what I learned. And to what extent
is that true for certain cancers? And to
what extent was that just sort of a one
model that I learned about as if it was
the model? [clears throat]
>> Yeah. Well, uh, I learned the same model
and I read the same textbooks, uh, and I
believed, uh, I I I had no reason to
challenge it, uh, that what you just
described as the model, um, the tumor
suppressor genes, the anka genes and and
all these kinds of things because I had
taught genetics uh, have a degree in
genetics from the University of Illinois
and uh, we were all led to believe that
I, you know, I I didn't uh, you I I was
a mamalian geneticist and we looked at
at mandelian inheritance of different
things. Um and then we learned that you
know cancer cells have a lot of
mutations and uh they seem to be um out
of control driven by what you just said
you know tumor suppressor gene defects
and anka gene turn on and all this stuff
and we had to became deeper and deeper
into the kinds of signaling cascades and
the phosphorilation defosphorilations
and all these kinds of things that we
get more and more in depth on this. Uh
it wasn't until I I started uh uh look
when we doing work on epilepsy uh we we
u mapped genes for epilepsy many many
different genes and we studied this for
many decades at Yale University when I
was there and here at Boston College and
um [clears throat] we were always
finding new genes but we never were able
to manage the the epileptic seizures
with the information that those gene
mutations were telling us. And then we
learned about this ketogenic diet that
seemed to work to manage epileptic
seizures uh regardless uh of whe
whether it was a genetic based uh
seizure, whether it was um acquired
based seizure, viral in infection
seizure. There's a lot of ways you can
get epileptic seizures, but it seemed as
though this ketogenic diet was able to
manage uh a broad range of of seizure
disorders. Um and then we said well
what's the common mechanism by which
this diet could manage these different
seizures of different origins and it was
never never clear to us. So, can I just
So, it's one way of sort of saying all
of that that
>> you know, if you go back in time and
then you and then you come back forward
in time, you know, we've got the
molecular revolution, we have the human
genome project, we start to figure out
like, okay, here's the genome sequence,
here's the gene for this, the gene for
that. We we there was this thinking that
there was going to be a gene for
everything. And so, as an example, in
the epilepsy field, you're saying people
started to uncover genes that were
associated in some fashion with
epilepsy. And as we accumulated that
knowledge, it didn't actually tell us
how to solve epilepsy. So we had all
these genes that were related to
epilepsy, but it wasn't really telling
us what to do treatment wise. But then
you had this diet, the ketogenic diet,
which was effective for treating many
forms of epilepsy. And it did not depend
actually on which mutations you had or
didn't have.
>> Yeah. And it was kind of surprising. And
then we were doing um angiogenic
research on on on brain tumors here. uh
we had found that there were certain
glyolippids that were provocative to
angioenesis and at the turn of the
century around 1999 2000 uh the the the
work in cancer was was the angioenesis
um surge the abnormal vascularization of
tumors and Judah Oakman had come out
with from Harvard uh saying that you if
you have an antibbody you could shut
down against vascular endothelial growth
factor and you know um Uh Jim Watson of
the Watson and Crick D D D D D D D D D D
D D D D D D D D D D D fame uh said, "Oh,
Judah Vulkman has found the cure to
cancer uh by targeting blood vessels and
shrinking shrinking the tumors down to
nothing." So we we were studying
angiogenesis
uh from the perspective of of
glycobiology
and and we were very excited about fi
finding certain glyolippids that
actually had an impact negatively on
angiogenesis.
Um but then we we were also doing
calorie restriction for epilepsy and
then we found out that calorie the the
work from Payton Rouse many over about a
hundred years ago showed that calorie
restriction can shut down angioenesis.
So so we're saying whoa what's going on
with the calorie restriction and then we
found out that the calorie restriction
could also um uh um manage manage
epileptic seizures. ke
ketogenic diets given in restricted
amounts managed epileptic seizures by
lowering blood sugar and elevating
ketones. [snorts] And um calorie
restriction did the same thing. And then
and then of course we started seeing
calorie restriction really uh shrink
angioenesis in cancer cells and it was
linked to the low the level of blood
sugar in the in the in the bloodstream.
So we had published a paper showing
there was a direct relationship between
how high your blood sugar was and these
were in mice. We did a linear regression
analysis, how fast the tumors would grow
and how how how the blood vessels would
be reduced in in conjunction uh with
with w with with lowering blood sugar.
>> So I said, "Wow, this is really
interesting. Anybody ever seen anything
like this before?" Of course. Of course
Worerberg had seen it a long time ago.
>> Okay, perfect. because I was going to
ask you about some of the history here
because it I I'm again I'm not a cancer
guy so I don't know all of the details
here on the history but as I started to
read your stuff and and other stuff in
this realm it wasn't that you know one
thought I had is okay well we must we
thought that the sematic mutation theory
was the way things worked that you
accumulated these mutations and tumor
suppression anka genes and that does
appear to be the way it works at least
for some cancers to some extent but then
you know over time our knowledge has
grown but then I I started reading some
of your reviews and I realized, oh no,
actually for a long time there's been
these different competing ideas on
ankcoenesis and how cancer arises. It's
there's a deeper history here than I
realized. So who's this Warberg
character and what are his ideas?
>> Yeah. Well, that's I didn't know who he
was. You know, in in science we all hear
of the Warberg apparatus and Otto
Warberg. Uh his name had always been
kicked around in the background of of
whatever we did. He had a major impact
on biochemistry. one of the leading
biochemists of the 20th century and he
was involved in a lot of different kinds
of things. The the photosynthe
photosynthesis.
Um he he uh he had produced many not
only did he have a Nobel Prize but he
Hans Krebs worked with him. Uh he he
worked uh with a lot of of of leaders in
the field of biochemistry. Um so I
started to think bigger about like well
who the hell is this Warberg? what what
what did he say and how did he say it
and then why was his ideas shelved? Uh
why why did the field move away uh from
him onto what we called the genetic idea
of what cancer is with tumor suppressor
genes and ankco genes and all this kind
of stuff. So I I started to go back and
my research on ma mice with brain tumors
and metastatic cancer controlling it by
lowering glucose and elevating ketones
showed me a power that uh rarely was
seen in a lot of the uh genetic ideas
about about cancer. uh with respect to
um improved quality of progression free
and overall survival uh was really quite
improved significantly
and and then I said well what was it
that Warberg said that was inconsistent
with what the worldview was
Warberg was an interesting character he
came from a history of scientists
physicists and this kind and he was
trained in the rigid u um quantitative
German German Germanic way of doing
science. And uh he he claimed that one
mole of oxygen consumed equals 7 moles
of ATP produced and that one mole of
lactic acid uh produced equal one mole
of ATP. And he was able to uh devise a
Meerhoff quotient unto determination of
oxygen consumption related to ATP
production. And um immediately he ran
into um a buzzsaw uh with his own work
as well as that of of of Sydney
Weinhouse who at that time was the
director of the National Cancer
Institute after the Second World War.
And Winehouse came right out and said
Warberg's hypothesis is not correct. uh
even though many cancer cells consume
less oxygen than normal cells, Warberg
attributed that to a a disturbance in
oxidative phosphorilation leading to a
compensatory uh f uh fermentation. So So
in other words, as cancer cells lost
their ability to generate energy through
uh uh oxidative phosphorilation, they
were forced to um compensate the lost
energy that uh with um the fermentation
mechanism, which is energy without
without. The idea there for those that
are not well versed in this so our cells
can make energy using our mitochondria
and something called oxidative
phosphorilation which requires oxygen
and that's a really good way to make a
lot of ATP a lot of energy. There are
other ways to make energy and they're
less efficient. The idea here that I
think it sounds like you were
articulating for for what Warberg was
talking about was okay if oxygen if
oxidative phosphorilation is compromised
the sh the cell will shift to using
something like glycolysis a less
efficient way of making energy because
something has disrupted this other way
it has to make energy.
>> Yes. And glycolysis would be super
upregulated in cancer cells relative to
normal cells. And and he felt that that
up that u massive upregulation of
glycolysis
uh which is what they call lactic acid
fermentation
uh was the signature of what the origin
of that was the disruption of oxidative
phosphorilation
>> and and he said if you disrupt oxidative
phosphorilation too acutely cells will
die because they will not have an
opportunity to compensate. So a chronic
disruption of oxidative phosphorilation
led to a protracted increase in uh in
fermentation, lactic acid fermentation.
>> And then he was trying to quantify those
phenomenon by showing that cancer cells
took in less oxygen but they produced a
far greater amount of lactic acid.
Showing the balance that the overall
energy balance was compensated for by a
non oxidative energy metabolism. A and
um that that was that was his his his
big thing that uh what what what what
Cydney Winehouse uh jumped all over him
on was that uh which leads today which
many folks in the field today are still
behind Cydney Winehouse which we have
eviscerated completely. uh but also
because of Warberg made some mistakes.
But but um uh the bottom line the bottom
line here is that Warberg had found a
couple of tumors that actually were
consuming oxygen at the same rate as
normal cells. And Winehouse pointed
those out and said, "How can you
possibly have an insufficiency of
oxidative phosphorilation
uh when when uh when you have oxygen
consumption equal to that normal cells
and tumor cells?"
>> Yeah. and and Warberg said, "Well, um uh
the the fermentation was unable to put
out the the the oxfas uh um the the
oxels
was unable to squelch the fermentation."
So I guess others Yeah, let me let me
others then jumped on the idea that oh
no, this is a this is a problem uh with
fermentation. It's an abnormal
fermentation has nothing to do with an
insufficient oxidative phosphorilation.
and the field jumped on this because
anko genes and all this became the
drivers of the fermentation uh and and
and going back to the oxygen consumption
argument of Warberg it was wrong. Mhm.
So, so as an episode in history, uh that
this is perhaps a good lesson because
you know biology is messy. Uh our
knowledge is incomplete. Warberg had
ideas, other people had ideas. There
were exceptions that seem to contradict
some people's ideas and people were
debating, you know, why are we observing
this if this is true and so on and so
forth. And so the score was never really
settled there. People disagreed. But it
sounds like what ended up happening is
um the field sort of uh uh agreed that
one one set of ideas was true even
though things weren't truly resolved.
Yeah. And and I think the biochemists
were beating each other up uh o over
these observations
uh and everybody coming out with a
slightly different uh interpretation. Um
was Warberg right? Was Warberg wrong? Uh
what does this support him? Did this not
support him? And that was all during the
1930s and 40s and 50s. And then of
course with the uh Watson and Crick
Nobel Prize for the structure of DNA and
of course many others were part of part
of this DNA revolution. And um you know
back at the early part uh of of the
century in in 1914
um
uh Theodore Bovery uh claimed that
cancer might be due to some sort of
chromosomeal aberration and maybe it has
maybe it's it's the chromosomes that
that might be uh because every time you
look at a at a tumor cell there was
always abnormal chromosomes uh in there
and it was that was just more or less um
kind of an off and and and Bovery
himself clear in that first he said you
know it was all speculative he said I
have no know he's never studied cancer
in his life he said I'm probably I'm
embarrassing the field I'm I'm a
interloper I don't know what I'm talking
about he said the cancer could be just
as due to something in the cytoplasm but
I have no idea I'm just speculating on
this
>> anyway when Watson and Crics came out um
oh wow this genomic stuff may have been
already known way back in 1914 by the
Bovery oh my god So we anointed him as
the father of the gene theory of cancer,
Theodore Bovery. Um and in the meantime,
biologists
have always been um inferior in some
ways uh to physics. Uh physics is the
pure intellectual idea of human brain.
Uh the highest level of of quantitative
assessment comes from physics. So many
biologists have always had physics envy.
>> [snorts]
>> And when Watson and Crick came out with
the quantitative analysis of of of
nucleic acid patterns to link to amino
acid structures, we now bring biology
into a molecular range far more
quantitative and less messy uh as you
said as a harder science. Yeah, hardest.
Absolutely. Even the physicists were
jumping in into the biology area now
because they felt that they could use
some of their skills and knowledge to
further understand the molecular biology
of of the cell. And and why it was just
like a a stampede of people. Everybody
you had to do something molecular.
Biology was no longer systems approach.
It was now a molecular kind of a
>> and one thing one thing I I think I want
to emphasize here and and I'll, you
know, get your input if you think this
is true.
>> [snorts]
>> You know, science science is this thing
that people have invented. And we have
this sort of ideal of science, what it
looks like if you're fully rational and
dispassionate and you're making totally
objective observations. But we have to
remember also that it's a human
enterprise and humans are social
creatures and we all have careers and
aspirations and motivations that have to
do with the social realm. And once the
molecular revolution happened in the
mid- 20th century through to the human
genome project and really until very
recently in my opinion [snorts]
one of the ways that you could make a
real career for yourself as a scientist
in the molecular biology realm was
identifying a gene for something
identifying an anka gene or a tumor
suppressor gene. And so there was this
really really sort of simplistic gene
centric mindset developed because you
could really make a whole career on
cloning and isolating and identifying
genes involved with cancer or some other
disease. And it got us into this sort of
very simplistic geneentric mindset I
think. Is that how how you see it or or
how you see it?
>> I think it started that way for sure. uh
in in in a less complicated way which
was thought only to uh explode into a
into a hopelessly complicated situation
which we have today.
>> Um but before we got there we thought uh
that we could uh identify
specific mutations that could be
responsible for the disregulated cell
growth. Um a and then it became it
became as it as the s as the field
evolved and Warberg was left behind and
getting back to your uh human nature
behavior. Sydney Winehouse had some
animosity towards uh Otto Warberg uh
because of Hitler sparing him during the
Second World War.
>> Um and and and uh he should have been
gassed uh with the with during the
Holocaust. Why why was Hitler sparing
him? And the stories that Sam Apple
brought out in his book Ravenous, uh
what Hitler feared cancer, like there
was no tomorrow. His mother died of
breast cancer or something.
>> And um he knew Warberg was the the guy
in the world uh that would have a better
understanding of of cancer than anyone.
And if there was going to be a solution
to this cancer problem, it would have
been Warberg. Um so he survived Second
World War working. He had no he was no
fan of Hitler, believe me. He threw the
brown skirts out of his lab. I mean he
was quite uh but he just wanted to
continue with his with his research and
then after the war uh White House and
other uh Jewish folks were concerned
that why what why did he survive when
the rest of us had to suffer?
>> I see. So they they had an
interpretation that maybe there was some
nefarious reason for that even though
apparently there wasn't. And remind me
Wine House was at the National
Institutes of Health at a pretty high
position. So, so that was a politically
powerful position that probably enabled
Wine House to have their ideas spread
further and faster than they otherwise
would have been.
>> Yeah. And the other thing too is Dean
Burke was um uh a strong supporter of of
Warberg and Dean Burke was also before
Winehouse the head of the National
Cancer Institute and he was thrown under
the bus with Warberg. of them were
discounted uh for various reasons and
and and um because the field was so much
more excited in the gene uh and and
getting into the molecular basis for
this and felt that the guys in the
biochemistry were not um were not really
doing anything. And in 1976, uh,
Winehouse wrote this book, wrote this
paper about Warberg's flicker of of
metabolism flickers only dimly now as
the field has moved away from this
ambiguity. And he eviscerated uh,
Warberg. And he even said to himself, he
hate to say unfavorable things to a guy
who died. Warberg died in 1970. and Wine
House wrote this paper in 1976 and
pretty much, you know, just just ripped
apart everything that that Warberg had
said and why he was wrong and all this
all this kind.
>> So, so we've got the science actually
happening. People are in the lab,
they're making observations, they're
coming up with hypotheses, but there's
also these political and social, career,
human aspects to what's going on. So,
people have, you know, political
motivations or career motivations to go
with or against other people. They want
certain ideas to spread, others not to
spread. And so, you know, that's all
mixed together with legitimate
observational and and scientific uh
disagreements that were happening.
>> Absolutely. That's the way science
works. Uh you you you have an idea and
and if you can get enough support for
your idea, you can you can turn the
direction of the field. A and uh as the
genes more and more genes became
recognized in cancer cells uh you know I
think there were Nobel prize prizes for
ankco genes and tumor suppressor genes
and these kinds of things and and then
it became it gradually became more and
more clear as the as the technology for
genetic analysis improved uh over the
years that cancer cells had thousands
and different kinds of of mutations. um
how is it possible that that any one of
these mutations could be linked to
disregulated cell growth? So then we had
to parse uh the types of mutations that
were uh present in these cells and we
called them pass at least um
Dr. Vogelstein from John's Hopkins
started to parse them out into passenger
genes and and and driver genes. So the
driver genes became more uh recognized
as those that were more likely to be
involved in disregulated cell growth
than some of these other passenger
genes. And then it became clear and
clear that, you know, we couldn't find
specific drivers that might be
responsible for disregulated cell
growth. Like the p-53
uh tumor suppressor gene uh was thought
to be the key driver of cancer, but not
all cancers had mutations in p-53 and it
was not always so clear uh about what
about what was going on. So then then he
introduced the dark matter. May maybe
maybe these really bad the real drivers
uh are in this called genomic dark
matter that that was nowhere to be found
or nobody knew what what it was. But it
was a it was saying yeah yeah the dark m
the dark matter. So so uh um what does
that mean? you know, it became it
started to become more bizarre uh as it
was not possible to uh to specifically
identify uh a particular gene or even a
group of genes that could count account
for the disregulated growth. So this is
a let me let me just say when we started
to take apart cancers and we started to
separate them into individual cells uh
within a tumor and then clone up those
cells and then do genomic screens on the
individual cells to get a better
picture. Every cell in the tumor not one
cell had the same genetic problems as
any other cell within the same tumor.
>> Yeah. Yeah. And so this is this is
another common pattern in in science, I
think, where, you know, someone has an
idea, they have a hypothesis. Naturally,
you want your hypothesis to be right.
You want your theory to be correct. So,
you're trying to gain support for it.
But very often, you start to accumulate
these observations that just don't fit
with it, things you can't quite explain.
>> [snorts]
>> And what often happens is that the
hypothesis just becomes more and more
elaborate and you start adding all these
auxiliary hypotheses to your theory and
you come up with these new concepts.
This is like what you meant by by the
dark matter concept and stuff like that.
You have to make your theory more
elaborate to accommodate the
observations that actually aren't quite
fitting with the original idea. And
before the theory actually dies or goes
away, sometimes years or decades can go
by where it becomes this sort of complex
and elaborate monstrosity compared to
what it was originally. And it's because
you're starting to accumulate ideas over
time that don't actually quite fit with
that idea. Yeah. Well, that's exactly
right. And and that and that uh shows
the um almost exactly what you said was
the situation uh for the um geocentric
theory uh of the solar system. um for
1,800 years from the from from from the
time of of Aristotle to Tami uh it was
thought that the earth uh was the center
of of of the solar system and the uh
mathematics to explain the movement of
the planets became more and more complex
with epicycles deference and equants and
it turned into a giant massive ball of
thread um challenging all of the minds
at that time to come up with more and
better and more sophisticated
mathematical formulas to explain the
movements of the planets. Even
Capernicus himself was struggling with
these same uh mathematics until he put
the the sun in the center of the solar
system using the same mathematics. Now,
now you could predict, you became
predictable as to where the planets
would be a and uh the the sun um was the
center of the solar system with the
earth just simply being another planet
moving around along with the other
planets and everything called the
capernician revolution and and
everything made sense uh from a a
massive amount of complexity and and
right now in the in the in the gene
theory, we we're stuck in this in this
uh quagmire of of more and more
complexity.
uh like like you like you've just like
you've just mentioned um ignoring
ignoring uh facts uh that have emerged
also in this complexity that are very
inconsistent with the with the somatic
mutation theory for example Sir Michael
Stratton out of England sir Michael
Stratton for his massive work he's done
on genomic uh revolutions genomic
analysis he published a paper in breast
cancer
showing a significant number of breast
tumors that had no mutations.
>> Um in compar using the same technology
where he found other breast tumors
loaded with mutations. Uh he found some
uh about 30% of breast tumors that had
that had no mutations. And I I I said
wow this is interesting. What does he
say about it? And the answer was
nothing. It was not even me. The data
were presented but there was no
discussion about
>> just kind of didn't talk about it.
>> No didn't talk about it. And and then
there was a paper by Parsons and a big
group I can't I don't can't remember
where they were may maybe John's Hopkins
I think they were at Johns Hopkins as
well um where they did a big screen uh
uh on glyopblasto
and um they looked at about 25 or 30
cases and they found mutations in all of
the major uh mutations in these in the
PI3 AKT signaling the the um um three
major signaling pathways except one
except one uh sample. It had no
mutations in any of the any of the major
pathways. The B B20 some in their figure
three of the paper and the the the BR20
sample had no mutations.
>> I said, "Wow, how do how do you explain
that?" And of course, not a single word
was mentioned about the single sample
that had no mutations in any of the
three pathways. Um we're now seeing uh
more more cancers. There's some
ependomobol blastoomas in children where
they have no mutations yet they all have
they yet they all have disregulated cell
growth. So that was kind of like well a
head scratcher because those findings
are not consistent with the sematic
mutation theory. And now with the deeper
sequencings over the last few years,
we're seeing driver gene mutations p-53
as well as others with significant
mutations in the structure of the p-53
and other uh u driver mutations in
normal tissues in normal cells and
tissues all throughout our body with no
disregulated cell growth associated with
the mutations in the driver genes.
>> Okay. So you're saying over time we've
accumulated these weird examples where
in some cases you have cancer cells but
they don't have mutations in the anka
genes or the tumor suppressor genes and
in other cases you've got normal cells
that are not cancer cells and they do
have those mutations and so these things
have just sort of accumulated to some
extent at least and they largely went
sort of unexplained. people just sort of
said, "Well, it's just one cell line in
that paper and they really didn't talk
about it."
>> Well, and and the most some of the more
recent papers have come out even
discussing the cancer cells that have uh
normal cells that have driver mutations
and and uh they don't really like to
discuss the fact that there's some
cancer cells that don't have mutations
because they say, "Well, you can't
support anything by the absence of
evidence." Um uh maybe our techniques
weren't as sophisticated. There's always
some excuse, but it's harder to explain
the driver mutations with mutations in
normal tissues.
>> So, what they say is we maybe we now
have to parse the concept of driver
mutations and and say that the search is
not yet complete for the really some
super category of driver mutations that
we seem to be missing. Even though we've
got even though we've cataloged over 100
million different kinds of mutations, we
still have not found the ones that
leading to the disregulated cell growth.
So it's more so the search is not
complete.
>> Yeah. So so the two ways to view this
conundrum are okay the search is not
complete. The mutations must be there
and we just haven't found him yet. Or
the alternative would be well you're
you're looking at you're looking up the
wrong tree here.
>> Yeah. Yeah. Well that's hard that as you
mentioned at the very beginning Nick
very hard to say you might not have been
correct in the theory that you built
your career around.
>> Yeah. Okay. So so
>> but let me let me say one more thing.
The devast the most devastating evidence
against the somatic mutation theory has
has come from the nuclear mitochondrial
transfer experiments where the nucleus
of a tumor cell is now placed in a
cancer um uh in a normal cytoplasm.
>> So you would expect that the normal cell
to turn into a cancer cell because it's
going to now have all of those mutations
that are supposedly there.
>> Yeah. So and and and you don't get that
that and the Israel Schaefer experiments
along with uh invivo Rudy Anish's group
down here at MIT. Um we had Jim Morgan's
group at at St. Jude's. Uh we had
Beatric Mintz at at Thomas Jefferson.
All of these classical developmental
biologists
uh were finding evidence that was
inconsistent uh with the sematic
mutation theory. So, um, you pile that
on top of the some cancers without
mutations, normal cells with driver
mutations and and and a cancer nucleus,
uh, uh, being with with supposedly the
the the the drivers and the, uh, tumor
suppressors uh, placed into a normal
cytoplasm with normal mitochondria is
the the neoplastic phenotype is
completely suppressed. And on the other
hand, if you take the normal nucleus and
put it into a tumor cytoplasm, you end
up with cells that are disregulated in
their growth. Wow. The these these
observations clearly state that the
origin of disregulated growth resides in
the cytoplasm, not in the nucleus.
>> Wow. Okay. So, so literally, people can
do experiments where you've got cancer
cells, you've got non-cancer cells. You
can suck the nucleus with all of the
nuclear DNA out of a cancer cell and put
it into a normal cell. And if it's the
case the cancer is caused by mutations
in that nuclear DNA, you should then
cause the non-cancer cell to become a
cancer cell because you're putting in
all those mutations. But you don't see
that. And then you're saying vice versa.
You can take the nucleus of a normal
cancer cell or non-cancer cell. So it's
got none of these supposed mutations in
it. Put it into a cancer cell and it's
still a cancer cell. And you're saying
that indicates that whatever's causing
the cancer to be cancer is in the
cytoplasm rather than the nucleus.
>> Yeah, absolutely. And and and and those
discussions of the nuclear transfer
experiments um very interesting
uh how they respond to them. uh uh one
uh person uh a leader in the field uh
one of the most uh recognized leaders in
the field was confronted with the data
uh with those uh mito mitochondrial
nuclear transfer experiments and said if
that if those experiments are true the
whole cancer field needs to be turned
upside down and be recognized as
incorrect. Therefore, those experiments
cannot be true.
[laughter]
That preserves the dogma of what's going
on. In other words, you they're so
profound in their in their
interpretation that it can't be true.
Yet, the leaders in the field of
developmental biology were the ones who
who did this. And the beautiful thing
about that, they were unbiased. They
were not asking whether cancer were a
genetic disease or a mitochondrial
metabolic disease. They were simply
asking the question can the nucleus of a
tumor cell direct normal development and
the answer is yes up to a degree and
then the system would abort. But uh they
never thought I was the one who took all
that and I reinterpreted the data in
light of the sematic mutation theory. Uh
that this is completely inconsistent
with the semantic mutation theory of
cancer. Uh they those guys were not
asking that question. They wanted to
know how far in development a cancer how
how how how far could a a cancer nucleus
drive normal developmental processes.
And then it turns out that there's yes
there are mutations in the nucleus of
the tumor cell. But it seemed to be the
those the products of those genes were
absolutely essential for moving the
organism from one developmental epoch to
the next. And when that gene was not
there, the system imploded and aborted
and and that's what they sat that's what
they found.
>> Okay. So, so in essence, you've got two
competing schools of thought. The
sematic mutation theory, which is
basically that you get DNA mutations and
that drives cancer. You've just laid out
some of the history there. Some of the
problems that kept popping up with that
hypothesis. You've also got this other
school of thought, what some people have
called what you've written the
mitochondrial metabolic theory. And this
is more akin to Warberg's ideas that
that look at it as a more of a metabolic
and mitochondrial issue. So if I go back
to what you said about Warberg's ideas,
tell me if this is a fair
characterization of sort of what the
essence of his hypothesis was. If you
shut off a cell's ability to use
oxidative phosphorilation, it's
mitochondria to generate energy. If you
do that quickly, the cell's going to die
because it's just not going to have
enough energy to to live. However, if
you do that slowly, if you sort of in a
prolonged fashion choke off the
mitochondria's ability to use oxidative
phosphorilation, the cell will adapt to
that in some sense by using glycolysis
and other forms of energy production
more than its mitochondria
and that is then going to lead to the
formation of cancer. Is that a fair
summary of what that idea was?
>> Yes. And then we just now we just have
to get into it a little bit more
detailed and and show the actual uh
processes by which that that can happen
and what happened with Warberg. So he
was rigid in in saying that one mole of
oxygen uh consumed was seven moles of
ATP and the field uh was locked into
that idea that oxygen consumption is a
good marker for production of ATP. Um we
just published a paper very recently
doing it uh using a novel experimental
design showing that brain tumor cells uh
both mouse and human oxygen consumption
is not an accurate marker for ATP
production through oxidative
phosphorilation. So people were making
>> people were making an assumption that
there would be a really tight
correspondence between the oxygen
consumption of a cell and how much it
was using oxidative phosphorilation
which sounds like a very natural
assumption because oxidative
phosphorilation depends on oxygen. But
what you're saying is that assumption is
actually not that good and for a cancer
cell it's very accurate for a normal
cell but not accurate for a cancer cell.
And Warberg was basing his uh actually
it was Hans Krebs who developed the the
technique for assuming that or for
showing clearly showing that oxygen
consumption was linked to ATP
production. Uh uh and he did he he did
those experiments and Warberg simply
used assumed also like everybody else
does that this is true that oxygen
consumption is a surrogate marker for
ATP production and in normal cells it
is.
>> Uh but in cancer cells it's not. They're
uncoupled. uh they they use oxygen to
produce reactive oxygen species uh with
much much less ATP coming from the
oxygen consumed than would be happening
in the normal cell. Okay.
>> So we were the first not not only us
there was a few other experiments done
in the scientific literature showing
that cancer cells use oxygen for some
for activities other than ATP
production.
>> Yeah. So, so this was the big mistake
and and now today, listen to this. We're
using the Seahorse oxygen consumption uh
machine uh instrument sold by the
millions and millions of dollars all
over the world for measuring uh ATP uh
for measuring o using uh formulas to
assume how much ATP is being produced
for oxygen consumption. Never never
using the direct chemical measurements
like we did. Yeah.
>> So, so, so the idea is we use
bioluminescence showing the degree of
ATP. Uh, seahorse instrument that most
people use now to say that oxygen
consumption is normal in to in cancer
cells. Yes, the cancer cells are taking
in oxygen, but they use a formula to
estimate ATP. They're actually measuring
ATP.
When we're the only ones, the first
group to actually measure simultaneously
oxygen consumption with ATP production
and there's a disconnect in cancer
cells. It's so so I mean I I wish more
people outside of science understood how
common this is. But when you are using
it's very common in science for
something like this to happen where
you're using calculation
to stand in for direct observation and
because you're doing math and because it
seems fancy and rigorous you lose sight
of the fact that you're not actually
observing things directly you're making
assumptions that are masquerading as
observation.
>> Yeah. That and that was one thing and
the other thing that Warberg did not
know about uh and nor do many people
today know about that the cancer cell
generates energy through two different
types of fermentation. one is the in the
cytoolic
uh in the in the payoff phase of the
glycolysis pathway in the Mden Meerhoff
arsens pathway uh where you get uh uh
ATP there and that's everybody knows
that's up upregulated in cancer cells
but the problem is there's different
types of pyuvate kynise so you produce a
lot of lactic acid but it's not an
accurate marker for how much ATP is
coming because the pyuvate kynise M2
isopform allows lactic acid to be
produced but it's not linked to ATP
production through that step. So
measuring lactic acid is not an accurate
marker for determining how much ATP
you're getting through through
fermentation.
>> That's number one. Number two, all many
people in the cancer field know cancers
are glutamine addicted. Glutamine
addicted.
>> What is glutamine?
>> Glutamine is an amino acid, most
abundant amino acid in our body. It's in
the bloodstream. It's it's a it's a very
valuable amino acid to run our immune
system, our our uh ura cycle. that's
needed for for nucleic acid synthesis. I
it's it's a very for our gut, the health
of our gut. Uh we use glutamine.
Glutamine is the most abundant amino
acid in the body and it's there for a
very specific reasons uh that that we we
know about. Um at any event, the field
knew that cancer cells were addicted to
glutamine. So you put cancer cells in in
oxygen and you see they taken in
glutamine. Oh, glutamine is being
respired. It's called an anoplurotic. I
hope I'm not getting too deep in the
science here for you.
>> No, no, no. Keep keep going. Keep going.
>> Because it's an anoplurosis. Anoplerosis
means the replenishment of the TCA cycle
with carbons. So when you look at uh
oxygen cons, you see oxygen consumption
and the and the uh gluc the the
glutamine is pouring into these cancer
cells and they they thought the
glutamine was being respired. We now
have direct evidence that the glutamine
is fermented in the mitochondria by by
mitochondrial substrate level
phosphorilation. So the mis why the mi
the misinterpretation of the data
because oh my my my cancer cells are
taking in oxygen and they're blowing out
uh ATP and we're seeing the ATP. The
problem is what's the origin of the ATP?
It's coming through a glutamol
fermentation glutamolysis pathway
dumping out suinic acid as a waste
product. So su suenate does not stay in
the TCA cycle. It's getting blown out as
a as a waste product. This is all new
stuff. This is brand new stuff.
>> Yeah. Yeah. [snorts] So basically one
way to summarize some of that is our
cells have multiple ways of creating ATP
the currency of energy in our cells.
There's oxidative phosphorilation in the
mitochondria. There's fermentation in
the cytool. There's lots of different
details that can go into exactly how
oxygen and other things like amino acids
get sucked in and then converted into
energy. And many people have made
mistakes or assumptions about you know
if I measure this one output it means
this is being used or that's being used
and a lot of those assumptions have been
mistaken uh in the past and so there's
been a lot of confusion generated about
what means what in terms of inputs and
outputs with respect to energy
production in the cells. Yeah,
absolutely. And and and and if you go in
the textbooks, you know, it says
predominantly uh uh cytoolic ATP
production uh fermentation and and
oxidative phosphorilation. But there's
there's what we now broken it down by
into traditional biochemistry. We have
two forms of ATP production. One is
through oxidative phosphorilation
uh uh in the mitochondrial inner
membrane through a chemo hypothesis of
Peter Mitchell. Uh and then we have
substrate level phosphorilation and
substrate level phosphorilation is the
movement of a phosphate group to an
organic molecule to produce ATP. So, so
you can produce ATP with a non oxidative
process and there's two of those. One is
in the cytoplasm and one is in the
mitochondria itself at the suanil coa
liase reaction. Uh alpha ketoglutarate
the suxenil coa to suxenate and you get
everybody said oh it's GTP in cancer
it's ATP and and they make a buttload of
it in in in the tumor metabolis and
they're dumping out suxinic acid. Let me
let me give you uh people in the heart
field uh the cardiovascular field knew
knew about this but never never turned
it over to the cancer field. For
example, when individuals have heart
attacks uh what you see right after the
heart attack is a buildup of lactic acid
and suinic acid in the bloodstream. And
those are the fermentation fuels that
are compensating for the acute loss of
oxidative phosphorilation. And your bo
your your neurons need to have a a
proton mode of gradient. They need a an
electrical process across the membrane
otherwise they're going to die. They
they cannot compensate for loss of oxfos
chronically to upregulate uh substrate
level phosphorilation. So what happens
is that you build up this massive amount
of of suinic acid and lactic acid and as
soon as the blood oxygen come back in
suinic acid and lactic acid both
disappear because because they were
needed there for a short period of time
to m to maintain the electrical chemical
gradients otherwise you're going to be
dead. So cancer cells are dumping out
lactic acid and suxinic acid even in the
presence of oxygen. Very different than
what happens during heart attacks and
interruptions of acute interruption of
oxidative phosphorilation. And this is
what Warberg said. Warberg said cancer
cells continue to ferment in oxygen. But
he didn't know that fer that glutamine
was the second major fermentable fuel.
And that caused a lot of confusion. So
so uh we've cleared all that up now.
becomes very clear. We've cleared up the
ambiguities associated with all these
mis mis uh assumptions and now we we
have hard data to support uh how these
cancer cells are in fact living in the
absence of oxygen using a fermentation
or in minimal levels of oxygen.
>> So, so uh a couple things I want people
to get here. So, under normal
conditions, non-cancer conditions,
[snorts]
>> you know, I'm breathing in air. I'm that
oxygen is going to my blood. It's
getting to all my cells and they're
using that as an electron acceptor in
the electron transport chain of the
mitochondria. This is part of the
oxidative phospholation way that we make
a lot of our energy. If I start working
out really really hard, I can't keep up
with how, you know, how far I'm pushing
my muscles. And [snorts] so things shift
from, you know, I I sort of running out
of oxygen in a sense. And so things
shift towards uh glycolysis and these
other forms of energy production. And
that's what builds up things like lactic
acid. And that's why say you start to
get tired and your muscles burn when
you're working out hard. Is that
accurate?
>> Yes. And you also build up some suinic
acid as well.
>> And but so what you're saying is okay,
that's how things work under normal
conditions. We would assume that um if
lactic acid is building up and things
like this, it must mean um the cell's
not able to use oxygen. But what you're
saying is tied to Warberg's ideas is
what actually seems to happen in some
cancer cells is they kick out some of
these things that you would expect to
see in the absence of oxygen even in the
presence of oxygen. Absolutely.
Absolutely. And people and the big thing
now is they're kicking out both um
listen to this, they're kicking out
lactic acid and suinic acid. Uh suxinic
acid leaves the TCA. It always should
stay in the TCA cycle if you're
respiring. But the tumor cells are
dumping suinic acid out. And not only
that, suxenic suinic acid stabilizes Hif
1 alpha a major ankcogene. Uh the
stabilization of Hif 1 alpha allows the
glycolytic pathway to proceed at maximal
maximal uh efficiency uh turned on. So
the ankco genes that we have now found
out like hif alpha and mick. These ankco
genes are facilitators
of allowing the cell to shift to a
fermentation metabolism because oxfos
becomes chronically disrupted. uh ankco
genes turn on open the floodgates to get
glucose and glutamine into the cell to
replace to replace the we to replace the
um uh reduction in energy through
oxidative phosphoration.
>> Well, I think this starts to bring us to
the idea that um I wanted to get to
which is you know we can juxtapose a
sematic mutation theory and a
mitochondrial meta metab metabolic
theory here for for ankcoenesis. But
these things are not mutually exclusive,
right? You can have metabolic shifts
that say generate reactive oxygen
species and lipid peroxides that then
mutate the DNA. And as you just
mentioned, you can apparently have DNA
mutations that actually then facilitate
or lock in metabolic shifts. Well, I
don't know if they're mutations there.
when you when you when you uh this is
what Greg Smensa found when when when
oxygen uh becomes deprived uh hifin
alpha which is made and broken and made
and broken becomes becomes uh stabilized
and that immediately upregulates the
fermentation pathway. So it's not really
a mutation
>> it's a gene expression change.
>> Yeah it's a it's a gene expression
thing. So uh so what happens is that you
are now allowing um ankco genes to be uh
expressed uh and and on and and of
course if the if the oxygen um comes
back the ankco genes are are are are
downregulated.
>> I see. So it's metabolic change in
tandem with epigenetic changes in
expression of genes rather than
mutations in the sequence itself.
>> Absolutely. Yes. So and and and and this
is what this is what was shown. Um when
when you take a cancer cell that has
ankco gene expression and you and you
have abnormal mitochondria in there
deficient oxidative phosphorilation, you
see these ankco genes on and when you
put new mitochondria, the ankco genes
turn off because you don't need them
anymore because they're respiring.
So but they are they're essential to
maintain viability of the cell. uh when
oxidative phosphorilation is in
insufficient to maintain viability. So
they'll do it.
>> So one thing I want to ask you about um
because I want people to get this piece
because it it's important here but it's
also just more generally important when
we're thinking about cell biology and
metabolism generally speaking. you
[snorts] mentioned the term coupling or
uncoupling and a lot of as you just told
us um over the last few minutes a lot of
confusion in this field in the cancer
field arose because people didn't
understand the relationship between
oxygen and ATP production and how that
varied how tightly those things were
correlated or not under different
conditions and you said that the can
cancer cells are often relatively
uncoupled when you say the word coupling
and uncoupling with respect to
mitochondria ATP production and oxygen
What does that mean? What is coupling?
>> Yeah. Well, coupling means that the that
the uh that the um production of ATP
through the F1 F-zero ATPA sometimes
they call it complex 5. It's a very
elaborate protein complex in the inner
membrane of the mitochondria that that
that proton motive gradient in that
builds up in the inner membrane space of
the mitochondria.
um uh the the ATP production is is
coupled to the to the um uh to the
degree of of proton protons uh
accumulating in the inner space. So so
uh those protons come passing back
through the F1F0 linked to the
production of ATP with oxygen pulling
pulling the electrons through all these
all these different proteins. So oxygen
serving as a as an a as an acceptor of
electrons is directly coupled to the
production of ATP through the zero ATPA.
>> So when this is happening when things
are tightly coupled oxygen it's almost
like a conveyor belt and oxygen is the
thing that's sort of making the conveyor
belt turn to generate the energy and so
you have very very maximally efficient
ATP production when you're in a tightly
coupled regime but then the extent that
the things become uncoupled what
happens?
>> Yeah. Yeah. Well, here's the situ during
that coup. When you say that coupling,
it's not only the oxygen pulling the
electrons through the various protons of
the electron transport chain. That that
pulling of of electrons is is is linked
to the pumping of protons. So, the
pulling of one pumps the other creating
the proton motive gradient which is then
coupled to ATP production. It's very an
incredibly sophisticated machinery. Um
but when you have uncoupling the proton
motive gradient the the hydrogen protons
pass back through the membrane into the
matrix theyak. So you're so you're
leaking. Yes. You're you're leaking. Now
some some of them some of these leakages
can be directed by uncoupling proteins.
Uh and some of these uncoupling proteins
are actually activated in cancer cells.
So you're dissipating the proton mode of
gradient the electrochemical gradient.
Yeah. By by dissipating that. That's
called uncoupling and but it's a very
important natural part of normal cells
uh to be to know how to couple and
uncouple the membranes
>> go in both directions it's it's
regulated sometimes a cell wants to be
more coupled or more uncoupled
>> uh it it has to be very carefully
regulated uh because uh this is the way
we produce heat when we uncouple we
produce heat rather than ATP so the the
the energy is is generated by ther
thermo regulation rather than ATP
production, but this in some tissues
allows us to do this depending on the
environmental situation. So, it's a very
sophisticated system. But in cancer,
it's broken.
>> Uh they're uncoupled and they're broken.
They're not they're not able to generate
an active proton motor gradient, thereby
leak causing the cell to force into a
fermentation because as Warberg said,
energy is everything. Without ATP,
nothing can survive. You must have ATP
to to allow all the gene expression
profiles. you have to have ATP. How is
that coming? H
>> So, so how general is the observation?
How firm is the observation that in
cancer you tend to be more uncoupled in
your mitochondria than coupled?
>> The evidence for that is the massive
production of reactive oxygen species.
>> So uncoupling tends to produce more
reactive oxygen species.
>> Yes. Yes. So you have to be very careful
about and cancer cells are known to have
a massive amount of of of the the
hydroxide radical and those are those
things are carcinogenic and mutagenic.
>> Yeah. Yeah.
>> So the DNA mutations that you see in
cancer cells many of them a lot of them
are are caused by the re reactive
oxygen.
>> So so are you saying so an implication
of that if I'm hearing this correctly is
that so if mitochondrial uncoupling
leads to less efficient energy
production and it produces more
reactive oxygen species and things that
can cause mutations. Could it be true
that historical observations of Anka
genes and mutations this was actually a
downstream effect of this kind of
metabolic change that happened rather
than being sort of the cause?
>> Yeah, absolutely. That's it. That that
[laughter] that's that's one of the
things. And just like I said with the
nuclear transfer experiments,
>> that would explain why in some cell
lines you see these mutations and some
you don't. It's because this was all
happening downstream of this
mitochondrial metabolic change and the
mutations aren't actually necessary but
they might be observed sometimes as a
consequence of the reactive oxygen
species production. Yeah. And not only
that also from the acidification of the
micro environment because what happens
when the cell the cancer cell is not
efficient in generating energy through
oxidative phosphorilation. Yes, it makes
a lot more reactive oxygen species which
further damage the ability of the uh uh
the efficiency of the electron transport
chain but but don't forget what are the
waste products of fermentation are
lactic acid and suinic acid which
acidify the micro environment creating
more disturbances in the nuclear genome.
So when people look at cancer, they
always say the nuclear genome is shot to
hell and it could be all varied in
different ways and different cells and
different conditions all very different
from each other.
>> So let me ask you this. This is just
something that's coming to mind
spontaneously for me. So [snorts] if all
if all of that is true then I think it
makes a very clear prediction with what
I'm about to ask you. So obviously the
extent to which our mitochondria are
coupled can change based on
environmental conditions. you know, you
can become more or less coupled or
uncoupled, you know, at any given time.
That being said, there are maternal
hapllet types, so the type of
mitochondrial uh DNA and mitochondria
that you inherit from your mother that
are more intrinsically coupled or
uncoupled. Some of us have a have a
mitochondrial hletype that makes us tend
to be very very coupled and some of us
have one that tends to make us more
uncoupled. Is it [snorts] known whether
people with more intrinsically coupled
mitochondrial hlet types tend to get
cancer at lower rates?
>> Uh the answer is I don't know. Okay. I I
think that question needs to be looked
at a little bit more carefully.
Now knowing that that cancer is a
mitochondrial metabolic disorder, that
type of question should be uh looked at
in a little bit more in a little bit
more uh serious way.
>> But you think is that is that a good
question or a good way to think about
it? I think I think it needs to be
looked at. I I certainly think there
needs to be some some evaluation of
that. It was never really thought about.
If you think the disorder is caused by
somatic mutations, your your entire
academic focus is on something other
than that.
>> Right?
>> So, uh now that once you realize that
there's a mitochondrial metabolic
disorder, questions like that now become
interesting. Let's go back and let's go
back and see if we can look at that. And
we know that yes the the the haploype
that those mitochondria are eventually
distributed to all all different uh
cells and tissues uh in our body and
they all have different levels of
uncoupling as part of their natural
environment and what they do in those
organs. Uh so some are generated from
more heat, others are more capable of of
of coupling than uncoupling. And all of
that are the sophistication and
modifications of mitochondrial function
ending up in different tissues and
organs of our of our body. Uh and so we
need to we need to look at that. We we
know that cancer cells can the there's
um substrate level phosphorilation is an
absolute absolute essential cap um
phenotype for having disregulated cell
growth and and and the rarity of cancer
in neurons of the brain and in card
mature cardomyioes they are they are
uncap incapable of shifting to substrate
level phosphorilation. So you rarely if
ever get cancers in cells that cannot
ferment. Um but the level of uncoupling
that would allow the the the variability
in cells needs to be looked at uh uh
more more carefully. Mo the most
important thing again we how do we how
do we connect this to disregulated
cell growth. Okay we great we have all
this it turns out and very clearly uh
that the proton mode of gradient in the
mitochondria through calcium signaling
controls the cell cycle. So the cell
cycle uh uh when how how how we should
divide and how we should become dormant
and quiescent is all under the control
of the calcium gradients within the
within the mitochondria. So what happens
when that mitochondria loses its
capability of producing energy
efficiently? The cell falls back on its
default state which is proliferation.
All cells when life first emerged on our
planet. There was no oxygen in the
atmospheres yet yet uh we had cells that
were dividing and they were disregulated
in their cell growth out of control. And
as Albert Senurgi said this alpha period
of life on earth was purely
unbridled proliferation driven by
fermentation metabolism. There was no
oxygen in the atmosphere. So it was only
the fusion of the archaacteria that was
actually able to capture uh oxygen and
then lead to the metazzoans
multisellular organism. Before that
everything was a single cell. So these
cancer cells are simply falling back on
ancient fermentation pathways that were
present or all cells prior to the oxygen
coming into the atmosphere.
>> It's the default state because that
literally was what came first from an
evolutionary perspective.
>> Yes. And the default state of cells is
proliferation. And the default energy
state is substrate level phosphorilation
because there was no oxidative
phosphorilation. And these cancer cells
are falling back and they will grow out
of control as long as they have fuels to
ferment. And the two fuels that have
been identified, we interrogated all
these are glucose and glutamine.
>> Glucose and glutamine. And so that's a
sugar and that's an amino acid. Neither
of those obviously is a fatty acid.
>> No fat. they can't burn fatty acids.
They accumulate lipid droplets in the
cytoplasm. So, uh you need a good
mitochondria to burn fatty acids and and
what happens? You see all these cancer
cells loaded with lipid droplets and
those are the fatty acids that can't be
metabolized.
>> I see. Okay. So, I was looking at that
figure in one of your papers. These lip
these big bubbles of fat accumulate in
these cancer cells and you're just
saying that's fat that's accumulating
because the cell can't actually use it
for energy production.
>> Absolutely. and and and in fact if you
take cells and put them in hypoxia they
start accumulating lipid droplets and as
soon as the oxygen comes back the lipid
droplets disappear.
>> Wow. So this is immediately make So so
here's where my mind's going. There's a
couple ways we can take this but here's
one way that connects to other podcasts
I've done. So I I became really
interested in um lipid peroxidation and
how that relates to dietary fat intake.
And there's been some interesting
observations recently in the literature.
People like um Timmy Aman and
Holidayiday at the University of South
Florida. They have observed that these
that colon cancer basically is seems to
be coming from these highly inflammatory
states that are closely linked to lipid
dysregulation.
And what you're telling me is, you know,
if you're right that mitochondrial
metabol metabolism gets disrupted, you
can't use oxidative phosphorilation as
well. you can't oxidize fatty acids as
well. You start making more reactive
oxygen species. This will increase the
odds that you will create lipid
peroxides that are toxic to the cell.
And you know, if I go back to the
holiday and work, if your cells have
accumulated a lot of say polyunsaturated
fatty acids, you've just got more stuff
now that can be turned into toxic lipid
peroxides from reactive oxygen species.
And so I'm starting to connect some dots
here for how things in the lipid
literature and and and and that stuff
relate to ankcoenesis based on the the
mitochondrial issue that that you've
been talking about.
>> Yeah, absolutely. And and and the the
key lipid in the inner membrane of the
mitochondria is cardioipin uh which is
polyunsaturated and and you start ros
damaging those and you start to reduce
the energy efficiency of the electron
transport chain the efficiency. So yes,
you're going to see a lot of and you do
see all this when you do really careful
examinations of lipid bio like we have
done in shotgun lipidomics. We see all
kinds of lipid abnormalities uh in these
cancer cells any one of which could be
produced by by peroxidations and all
these kinds of things and they just
contribute to the inflammatory cascade
that's going on uh in this and then what
happens is you you you create what we
call a wounding. It's like the body, the
immune system sees that abnormality as a
wound and they come in and they throw
cytoines and growth factors on top of
this which creates then a worse
situation. They're doing uh things out
of context uh creating making a bad
situation uh much much worse. So uh you
can see that and then we showed how that
leads to metastasis because the immune
cells start to fuse with these cancer
stem cells uh leading to uh abnormal
immune cell function leading to spread
of cancer cells around the body all
driven by by by glucose and glutamine.
So the the way we know we're right is by
the response of patients to targeting
glutamine glucose and glutam glucose and
glutamine at the same time by
transitioning the whole body over to
therapeutic ketosis. The cancer cells
can't burn fatty acids or ketone bodies
and they're dependent on on glucose and
glutamine for their disrupt growth.
>> Is that generally true? No cancer can
burn fatty acids.
>> No, because they accumulate them in the
lipid droplets. They they can't you
can't we have in fact we throw it out to
the field. Anybody who can show us a
cancer cells that can grow on fatty
acids or ketones in the absence of
fermentable fuels, I'll give them a
hundred bucks. I have [laughter] the
$100 here. Yeah. Guess what? No. In
fact, one of my colleagues said I'll
give you a thousand bucks. the the
cancer cell can't grow without
fermentable fuels. It's you can't burn.
Fatty acids are non- fermentable.
>> Okay. So, so this brings us to now the
question of well, so there's two
questions I want to get to. We're going
to have to take them separately. So,
[snorts] there's the question of if you
put a if you put people into ketosis
with a ketogenic diet, to what extent
can this prevent or treat existing
cancers? And then there's the question
that we have to get to eventually, which
is if broken energy production in the
mitochondria is a cause of cancer, we
have to then ask, well, what's breaking
the the mitochondria to begin with?
Let's take those one at a time. So talk
a little bit more about ketosis and the
use of a ketogenic diet say as a cancer
prevention or treatment modality. Well,
I you know I years ago when I did the
calorie restriction stuff I I said well
you know how when we did the comparative
analysis of mouse and human you have to
understand basil metabolic rate the
basil metabolic rate of a mouse is seven
times that of of of a of a human. So
when we were getting these spectacular
responses to calorie restriction in the
mouse we said wow wow we let's see how
do we have to how do we translate that
over the human it's water only fasting.
So I said, "Oh my god." Because we saw
water only fast in the human produces
the same biochemical parameter changes
you see in a mouse under 40% calorie
restriction. So we thought, "Oh, just
cut down your food by 40%. You'll get
what this mouse does." No, no, no. You
got to go water only fasting because
there's differences in beta basil
metabolic rate. So I said, "Wow, that
that ain't going to fly." Uh how many
people with cancer are going to say,
"Oh, now I got to not eat for 14 20
days. Just drink water." People don't
want to do that. So we were working with
the ketogenic diet and epilepsy and the
little kids were seem to be okay with
that. So we said why don't we try to
because people that seems at least
you're eating something you're not like
feeling you're going to starve to death
and then we started to work the
ketogenic diets our knowledge of
ketogenic diets for epilepsy applied to
the to the cancer problem. And that
seemed to be a viable solution until
everybody went nuts about eating lard
and doing all this crazy stuff uh with
ketogenic diets. But what it actually
does is a paleolithic diet uh which we
realized can put you into nutritional
ketosis if you eat um foods that are low
in carbohydrates, restricted amounts of
highly uh uh restricted carbohydrates.
Uh you can get into a nutrition state of
nutritional ketosis just like our
paleolithic ancestors where there was no
highly processed carbs uh and and and
foods that would raise blood sugar
levels uh very high. So exercise and low
carbohydrates will put you into a state
of nutritional uh ketosis. Now that
state is very very uh uh good for the
normal cells of our body because we my
my late friend uh Richard Vch Hans Krebs
his last student and I would talk for
hours about the value of ketone bodies
being a super fuel. They generate more
ATP without producing reactive oxygen
species. Unbelievable. So we can
transition the whole body over to
ketones making the rest of the body
super healthy reducing systemic
inflammation a fuel that the tumor cells
can't can't use. So uh how do we do
that? Uh and the answer is we we can
take like on our recent Greek study you
should see this we were able to keep
these glyobblastoma patients alive for
three years or longer on these on these
Mediterranean ketogenic
calorierestricted Mediterranean diet was
un it was tremendous. So, there's so
many ways to get into nutritional
ketosis, not uh not just using ketogenic
diets. You can you can use low
carbohydrate diets. Your body will start
producing ketones naturally uh from
these from these situation. So, that's
what that's what we're doing. We're
we're we're transitioning people to
nutritional ketosis uh which lowers
glucose and replaces glucers blood sugar
and replaces the the sugar with ketones.
The brain can burn it, heart can burn
it, muscles can burn it, uh cancers
cannot burn it. And then we have to go
after the glutamine targeting uh with
drugs because we we target we have to
target the glutamine with drugs and
exercise. So, so is the essence of what
you're saying here or part of it that if
[snorts] you put someone into
nutritional ketosis, they're using
ketone bodies like BHB to generate
energy much more so than they're using
glucose because it's a very ultra low
carb diet and you're getting a high fat
intake. So, is what you're saying that
you're essentially because cancer cells
can't use those fatty acids that you're
essentially starving them, but your
other non-cancer cells are not starved
because they can use those ketone
bodies? Yes, it's a transition. Our body
evolved. We're we're a very versatile
machine. We have survived on this planet
under the most stringent conditions.
We're all alive today because of the
flexibility of our bioenergetic systems.
The cancer cell have compromised that
bioenergetic system by having
dysfunctional oxidative phosphorilation,
pigeon holing them into a fermentation
metabolism.
>> So they're metabolically inflexible,
which is the very adaptation that is
part of what makes us human in many
ways. You could argue.
>> Yeah. Perfectly. Yes. And yet the cancer
field says, "Oh, cancer cells are so
flexible. They're so versatile." Because
you're always giving them fermentable
fuels. As long as they have fermentable
fuels, they'll appear to be very tough.
>> So you said you said something earlier.
So you said the ketones uh I want to ask
so so pound for pound if you're giving a
cell ketone bodies as opposed to
glucose. How is how much ATP can be
produced from the ketone bodies molecule
for molecule compared to glucose and how
much reactive oxygen species are kicked
out when you use one substrate versus
the other.
>> Okay, let's let's our our bodies will
make ketones in the liver. So you will
mobilize the triglycerides out of the
out of the atapose cell cells and
they'll go into as as insulin goes down
glucagon the hormone that or triggers
the mobilization of fats out of
ataposites goes up. So our bloodstream
starts to fill up with with um um
triglycerides. You can see it on the TLC
plates. We did it. Uh and those
triglycerides then go to the liver and
the liver takes the two um glycerol
backbones and makes actually can make a
glucose molecule through
gluconneogenesis. But that level of
glucose is just residual because the
brain will suck up like a like a vacuum
any any available glucose. Um so and
then the the the it's like putting fatty
acids into a wood chipper. uh you the
liver chops them up into water soluble
ketone bodies which now circulate
through the through the bloodstream and
go to all tissues that that have
adequate oxidative phosphorilation. So
so where are we getting uh our energy
from is a ketone body. Now let's get
back to the why the ketone body is such
a powerful fuel and go now we're because
they have more carbon hydrogen bonds
than does a pyuvate and now I'm going to
explain this to you. So, so uh we get
more uh reducing equivalence NADH
out of a ketone body than we do out of a
pyuvate molecule. So, we're we're
producing the fuel for uh a greater
amount of fuel for oxidative
phosphorilation by burning a ketone
body. Number one. Uh number two, ketone
bodies deliver all their electrons to
complex one with very little being
delivered to complex two. So we create a
a more oxidized co-enzyme Q couple
>> which leads to uh an efficient that
proton mode of gradient will go up ever
so slightly without a without uh uh they
do not uncouple. So um ketone bodies do
not uncouple. So
>> So you're saying you're saying ketones
if you're on a ketogenic diet your
body's using ketones that promotes
greater coupling in the mitochondria.
>> Yes. a a a 28% better coupling than
pyuvate. Now, people will say, well, why
don't you burn fatty acids? Because they
have a lot more carbon hydrogen bonds um
than than does the ketone body or the
pyuvate. And what happens is they create
a very steep proton motive gradient
almost like then you the body has to
release the pressure. So, they
automatically turn on uh uncoupling
proteins naturally. So they dissipate
the proton motor gradient uh reducing
the delta G- prime ATP hydraulic even
though they have more carbon hydrogen
bonds. It's too steep. It's too steep
and the body the they naturally open up
u uncoupling uh regulated uncoupling
proteins thereby reducing the efficiency
of energy with the fatty acid. uh the
ketone body does not uncouple, produces
very few oxygen radicals and has more uh
carbon hydrogen bond does the pyuvate
thereby calling it a super fuel. For
each breath of oxygen you take in
burning ketones you get more power from
from from that bioenergetic efficiency
of a ketone body. This is unbelievable.
So this allow this allowed us to survive
the most harsh conditions of famine and
and droughts and all this because we're
able to shift from one fuel source to
the other for and our brain is naturally
capable of burning ketones. They burn
sugar,
they burn glucose and they burn ketone
bodies, but we are we are capable of
transitioning our nervous system over to
ketone bodies. So so that that keeps us
alive and functional. So, so some people
argue, well, if you give the body, the
human body, glucose and ketones, if you
give it carbohydrates and fats, it will
preferentially burn the carbohydrates
and therefore that's what our cells want
and that's the better fuel supply. What
do you make of that argument?
>> Well, I think that's true in part not
because it's a better fuel fuel supply.
Uh, is is that when you take in
carbohydrates, you turn off glucagon.
insulin goes up, glucagon goes down, and
you piss out the ketones. So, it's the
way the body is is is utilizing this.
You have to look at the hormonal
balance. When you're in nutritional
ketosis, insulin is low, glucagon is
elevated. As soon as those carbs come
in, insulin goes up, glucagon goes down.
You don't need the
>> the brain will preferentially burn burn
glucose for sure,
>> but but it has the capability of
adapting to ketones slowly. That's why
you can't go oh real real quick.
>> Yeah. So, so I'm going to give you sort
of my take on some of this and I would
love to get your reaction to it. So, a
lot of people love to get into the holy
wars of carbohydrates are a better
substrate, fatty acids are a better
substrate, ketosis is better,
carbohydrates are better. My sort of
view when I take an evolutionary lens to
look at how humans evolved and the
metabolic flex the remarkable metabolic
flexibility that we have [snorts]
whether or not you know one group of
humans ate a ketogenic diet or a high
carbohydrate diet or whatever I think in
pre-industrial times in paleolithic
times for most of human evolution
people were transitioning from one
metabolic state to another probably on a
seasonal basis at least and so in some
sense It's not that we're supposed to be
in ketosis all the time. We're supposed
to be in carburn all the time, but I
think we're probably adapted to switch
between these on a seasonal basis and as
a function of the feast and famine
cycles that naturally happened for most
of human history. And so, it's actually
the metabolic flexibility and the
switching between states that might be
the thing to focus on here rather than
trying to pigeon hole people as being,
you know, we we should eat carbohydrates
or we should eat fats all the time.
Yeah, you're you're you're 100% right on
that. We have to look at our
evolutionary past and who were we as a
species. Yes, we were feast and famine
and and during seasonal periods when
fruits were ripe and you had more more
carbohydrate people and ripe berries and
all this kind of stuff. Uh you would you
would gravitate uh towards that and
that's the beauty of our body. It's a
very flexible machine. Uh we we evolved
to be extremely flexible in how we
during seasonal times, exercise, all
this kind of stuff. The tumor cell is
not flexible, so it cannot make those
transitions readily. If you're locking a
body into a low carbohydrate diet and in
a ketosis, yeah, it's going to put
pressure on the tumor cell, but then if
you switch to a high carbohydrate diet
really well, the body knows how to do
this, the normal cells, but the tumor
cell, even though you'd be giving it the
fuel, it it can't make the the rapid
transition. So you can just go up and
down as long as you know how to use.
This is why we developed the glucose
ketone index calculator which will be
the new tool uh for managing cancer and
chronic disease in the population. This
is a ratio of circulating glucose to
circulating ketones and it comes out as
a as a ratio and we know that we we
exist in certain zones in our life uh
that put us at risk. uh if we have high
GKI all the time, we put ourselves at
risk for a broad range of chronic
diseases and mitochondrial damage as as
the result of a variety of insults on
the efficiency of oxidative
phosphorilation. But if we go down into
the the green zone, which is a GK of 2.0
and below, we're going to put a world of
hurt on these cancer cells. But how long
do we stay in the green zone before we
flip back up to a a yellow? In other
words, going up and down because our
bodies just like just like you said,
Nick, we evolved to be in these
different states uh seasonally. Uh where
the cancer cells are not flexible, but
our bodies are flexible and we can
actually eliminate these tumor cells
gradually by taking the full power of
the health ability of our body and
marginalizing these these tumor cells
out of existence. So, you're right. We
need to know about how our bodies work.
What is what does it mean to be in metab
metabolic homeostasis?
uh what do we do in these how does our
body maintain homeo homeostatic homeo
metabolic homeostasis in different in
different zones of the glucose ketone
index and this is you know we're working
with Greg Glassman former owner of the
CrossFit and Emily Kumer Kaplan we're
going to build these metfix boxes uh
where we're going to be able to train
people to know how to use the GL glucose
ketone index uh monitor to put
themselves into different zones
switching from from the zones that you
that you have mentioned to make our
lives more meaningful. Uh but knowing
that we can uh by moving in and out of
these zones, we can we can keep
ourselves at a at a much a much higher
state of of of of health. And we would
have it on our cell phones so that we
can then monitor on the cell phone at
any given time what your GKI is and
knowing what zone you're in relatively
uh on that particular day and how long
you want to stay in these dangerous
zones and how long you want to stay in
that super healthy zones becomes a
personal choice.
So if to the extent that broken
mitochondrial metabolism underlies
cancer because uh if you can't use
oxidative phosphorilation effectively
you're going to use these more
evolutionarily primitive forms of energy
production like glycolysis. You're
saying cancer cells exhibit that more.
They're not using oxidative
phosphorilation as much. To the extent
that's true, it begs the question of
what is breaking mitochondrial
metabolism and the ability to use
oxidative phosphorilation to begin with.
Do we know what some of the major
drivers are there for that disruption?
>> Yeah, we know most of them. And this was
uh Albert Sergi's encogenic paradox
which we solved in the in which we've
already solved. He was always
mysterious. He was always like, whoa,
you almost anything you you've
identified can cause cancer at one one
form or another. What's the common
pathofysiological
mechanism leading to chronic disruption
of oxidative phosphorilation? So when I
did in my book in 2012, I went back and
looked at chemical carcinogens and a lot
of these chemical carcinogens cause
autofllororesence in the mitochondria uh
leading to disruption of oxidative
phosphorilation. Ankcoenic viruses uh
like papilloma virus, hepatitis C vi
these viruses either enter the
mitochondria themselves or the products
produced in the nucleus go to the
mitochondria to disrupt oxidative
phosphorilation. um radiation, we know
intermittent hypoxia, we know r rare uh
in chronic inflammation, C- reactive
protein, elevations of C- reactive
protein linked to systemic inflammation.
Systemic inflammation chronically
damages the efficiency of oxidative
phosphorilation. Um rare inherited
mutations like people say, oh what about
BA 1? What about the uh what about PE
relief ramen? What about the uh you know
retinol blasto? These are known genetic
uh risk factors. Every one of those risk
factors damages oxidative
phosphorilation in one way or another.
So they're and none of them are 100%
penetrate, meaning they're secondary
risk factors. You know why some woman
with a with a brack one mutation uh gets
cancer and another woman with the same
mutation never gets cancer. So uh
because whatever only the ones that have
cancer have oxidative phosphorilation
dysfunction coupled to a sub secondary
fermentation. So what you're saying what
you're saying is the reason that those
BRCA mutations famously link to breast
cancer is not because 100% of the breast
cancers require those mutations. It's
because if you have the mutation, it
indicates you definitely have that
mitochondrial dysfunction. But even if
you don't have that mutation, you can
still have mitochondrial dysfunction,
which is why you observe both the
mutation and the absence of the mutation
with breast cancer.
>> Yes. That's and and also 50% of the
women that have the mutation
uh get get breast cancer but but 50% of
them that have the mutation do not get
breast cancer.
>> So why do the women with the have the
mutation don't get breast cancer? It
seems that in those women the mutation
was never capable of damaging oxidative
phosphorilation even though the mutation
was there. Oxfos continued to function
effectively in the presence of the
mutation. People say well what could
cause that? Well, in genetics, we've
known for we know what we call
suppressor genes. These are these are
other genes in the genome that suppress
the action of one gene. So how does
suppressor genes work to to reduce
penetrance of some of these uh inherited
risk factors and the answer is uh we
don't know precisely uh how that works
but but certainly an area of very
interesting uh study you know why why
should somebody with a you know with a
leaf many leaf many is the is the most
penetrant of all the inherited risk
factors and it's it codes for um
cytochrome synthesis of cytochrome C2 uh
which affects the electron transport
chain that's about 90% penetrint. Well,
what explains the 10% that have the
mutation that don't get any cancers uh
maybe a suppressor gene or something.
Also, it allows us to now know that if
this is the case, we can use uh diet and
lifestyle to reduce the risk of even the
inherited uh risk factors. So, we we
have more control. Uh bottom line is
once you know cancer is a mitochondrial
metabolic disease, you have a much
greater control as to whether or not
you're going to get a cancer.
>> So there's many different ways to break
mitochondrial metabolism. That's part of
what you were just saying. You know, age
is a factor, inflammation, pathogens,
hypoxia, you name it. There's there's,
you know, chemical exposures can break
all of these things can break
mitochondrial metabolism, even though
they're very different things. Yeah,
>> another thing I want to mention here is
you know as we alluded to earlier the
mitochondria are endo symbiotic in
origin. They used to be free living
cyanobacteria but that got engulfed
somehow by our cells and [snorts] they
are because of their origin in that way
they are light sensitive. So they're
modulated by light and obviously one of
the ways the physical environment is
very different today than it was for our
paleolithic ancestors is that the light
environment is very different. the
pattern and intensity of different
wavelengths of light that we're exposed
to are different and [snorts] the
mitochondria are light sensitive. What
do we know about light and its ability
to drive messed up mitochondrial
metabolism?
>> Well, that that might come through um um
the um melanin uh
melatonin the these kinds of light
sensitive hormones. Uh yes, we we
evolved in a light dark cycle. Uh light
is extremely important for the normal
circadian rhythms. normal circadian
rhythms maintain mitochondrial function.
So if we're if we're exposed to uh le
having less exposure to light than our
than our ancestors did, it it's just one
more of the stress factors that uh
contribute to mitochondrial uh oxidative
phosphorilation dysfunction. Yes. A very
important m it links to the circadian
rhythms. You say we we say today what's
what's responsible for the the cancer
epidemic with we have one we have uh
618,000
people are predicted to die in 2025
uh from cancer which comes down to 1,700
people a day uh or 70 people per hour
are expected to die this year uh from
from cancer. Clearly, clearly we're
we're we're in an epidemic of of of of
of this of unhealth. Okay? So, you have
light sensitivity. You you you have poor
a lot of highly processed carbohydrates
that are minimally nutritionally of
value that create uh systemic
inflammation. You have lack of exercise.
You have emotional stress. Whether
you're sitting in traffic, you're
looking at the computer, you're looking
at your cell phone all day long. uh you
have poor sleep as the result of the uh
uh circadian rhythm disruption. Uh you
you put all those factors together and
you have an epidemic not only of cancer
but of all these chronic diseases as
well. Type 2 diabetes, uh you have
obesity, uh you you have cardiovascular
disease, you have cancer, you have the
whole package, dementia. You put all
those things together and the and the
majority of our chronic diseases
including cancer are the result of
mitochondrial dysfunction coupled to a
substrate level phosphorilation
contributed by a whole variety of
different factors uh in the environment.
This is called the alcogenic paradox.
That's why we solve this. And then you
can use a glucose ketone index to bring
yourself back into these uh healthier
zones. So do what you need to do to get
light to to reduce your stress to get
more exercise and you bring yourself
back into a more normal zone thereby
reducing cancer risk and and and and and
chronic disease risk. So so clearly we
have a clear strategy. The question is
can the American public recognize this
and now and now take steps to prevent
cancer and if you do get cancer how to
manage it and prevent other chronic
diseases. I want to ask you some more
details about therapeutic ketogenic
diets such as those that that you and
others have used um in this area of
research. So there's many different
ketogenic diets one could eat. And what
I mean by that is you know the fatty
acid profile of your ketogenic diet
could be very different from someone
else's. You might be having high
saturated fat, high polyunsaturated fat,
monounsaturated [snorts] uh all the
different combinations thereof. We
mentioned earlier that polyunsaturated
fatty acids they can be oxidized readily
by reactive oxygen species and this
produces toxic uh byproducts reactive
aldahhides and things like this that
damage cell components and we you know
we alluded to some other work that's
been done related to that stuff. When
you guys use a therapeutic ketogenic
diet, what are the specific fatty acid
profiles that you use? And what's
important to think about here in terms
of fatty acid composition from saturated
to more unsaturated fats? Well, this the
saturated fats uh mediumchain
triglycerides are are more provocative
for bu building nice uh ketone bodies
than polyunsaturated fatty acids.
Polyunsaturated fatty acids can give uh
flexibility to membranes like olive oils
and things like this. I mean there's
there's a number of polyunsaturated
fatty acids that are very fish oils and
things like this uh that are very
healthy for you. Um but to make ketones
and the answer is uh we we use we use
mono um mediumchain triglycerides,
avocados, we try to get we try to do it
with as much natural uh fatty acids as
possible. Always calorie restricting
them. always using the glucose ketone
index which is the ratio of circulating
ketones to glucose as kind of a guide.
Uh so um people say you we use the GKI
more uh to know what zone you're in uh
as opposed to the types of fatty acids
that you are consuming. But we but we
know there are natural ways to get
ketones ketogenesis natural ketosis. uh
you're mobilizing the fats predominantly
out of your uh uh atyposytes but at the
same time if you take in a diet with
mediumchain triglycerides whether it
comes from a plant or an animal uh
you'll get you'll produce better uh all
natural ketone bodies and again it
should be done under low glucose because
the lower the glucose the more the need
for the body to make ketones uh from the
liver. So um and [clears throat] you're
you're right about that. I mean we're
experimenting more with that. what are
the best diets to produce the most
natural forms of ketone bodies again
with understanding calorie restriction
and using the GKI as a quantitative
measure. So we no longer need to be in a
mysterious state. Oh, I think I'm in
ketosis by pissing on some strip or
blowing out some something. We actually
have a ratio now that is based on blood
on blood. Uh we have a glucose
continuous monitor. Now we're going to
eventually we'll have glucose ketone
continuous monitors. So we'll be able to
know precisely what level of ketosis
we're in and the types of fatty acids
that we can consume to bring us into
these zones in a healthy state.
>> Okay. But it it sounds like in essence
what you're saying is that okay the
ketogenic diet is a highfat ultra low
carb diet. You're going to use those
fats to make ketones for energy as
opposed to glucose. But those ketones,
those fatty acids that you're using for
energy, those are more readily made from
shorter chain smaller fatty acids.
Whereas the longer chain polyunsaturated
fast fatty acids are more likely to be
used for like membrane structures and
things like that.
>> Yeah, that's true. Um they're not burned
uh as readily as the as the other fatty
acids, but some of them are are
unhealthy like you mentioned. They can
create inflammation like arachidonic
acid uh 24 uh that's a provocative
inflammatory uh fatty acid used for um
you know inflam inflammatory uh
conditions where others uh like omega-3s
are used for anti-inflammatory uh
activities.
>> So it it sounds like you would not
recommend someone to have a very high
omega-6 polyunsaturated fatty acid
content in their ketogenic diet.
Um yeah, I I think we need to work
better on that. I I think I think we
need to be more cognizant of the foods.
Uh ultimately, we're going to be taking
in the food. We want to have uh a food
menu that is palatable
and therapeutic at the same time. Um and
that's where uh food science and
technology uh will start making their
move into this into this space into this
zone. uh improving uh uh making natural
ketone bodies more efficiently from
foods that are known to be healthy
>> uh as opposed to those that are not
being healthy. And I think that's a an
area that will be exploding uh here in
in the next uh several years and and
we're going to have the quantitative
biomarkers to to let people know number
one, how do you feel? What state are you
in? Oh, you know, it's like
unbelievable. So, uh and and it might be
different from one person to another. We
can't group. We we have people that are
different in age, in gender, in culture,
in religion. Uh all of these will have
to be uh recognized when we're building
these new uh strategies uh for managing
chronic disease. So this is the future.
Uh right now, you just have to have the
platform, the bedrock upon which to
build all these in a logical way. Um
recognizing that cancer is a
mitochondrial metabolic disorder now
allows us to shift uh to logical
science-based strategies for managing
this. And of course the chronic disease
world will be dragged along uh with this
because the cancer is recognized as the
number one fearful disease in the world.
It's not getting better, it's getting
worse. When someone is diagnosed with
diabetes, they they don't feel like like
the uh angel of death is looking over
their shoulder. When you get cancer, you
know, you're looking at the grim reaper.
Well, this this has all got to change.
Uh yes, it'll be an unfortunate
diagnosis, but we have a clear strategy
on how to manage that without collateral
toxicity. There should be none of these
medieval treatments of of of poisonous
chemicals, surgical mutilations the way
we're doing it and incinerating
radiations. I mean, we can use all of
those strategies, but now they have to
be recognized to be used in a very
different plan than they are currently
being used. So I I'm very hopeful for
the future of managing not only cancer
but m multiple other chronic diseases
and giving individuals the tool to know
uh they they'll now be able to take much
greater charge uh over their existence
because they'll have the definite tools
and know what to do and how to do it.
And that's a personal choice and you can
either do it or not do it. It's not
we're not forcing anybody. We're not
going to tell anybody don't eat that,
don't eat this. You just look at the GKI
monitor and tell you whether you should
eat it or not. you make the choice for
yourself.
>> Um,
I want to zoom out a little bit. So,
cancer at the level of society, where
are we with cancer in terms of, you
know, how common it is and whether or
not certain cancers are becoming more
common today than they used to be? Can
you give us a general sense of that?
>> Yeah, the general sense is that it's
becoming more and more in younger
people. I I I I think uh I'm not sure
we're seeing it. I'm seeing it. I I you
know I I get calls and emails all the
time from young people asking me to help
them with transitioning to metabolic
therapy. Uh and we give them a net a
planned. We've written we we've written
a very comprehensive treatment protocol
for managing glyobblasto which could be
used for any cancer. But we're seeing so
many people in their late 20s and early
30s now with colon cancer, breast
cancer, uh various types of cancers
where we would never see that many in
the past. And and I and as I said when
when this new big paper we put out uh on
on uh the Warberg hypothesis and the
emergence of the mitochondrial metabolic
theory, we have a big section in there
where we've now incorporated forever
chemicals and microlastics and these
kinds of things that are now entering
our environment in greater amounts than
we had in the past. You you couple that
with an obesity epidemic where where
chronic disease C reactive protein is
now elevated and you combine that with
these these uh other things and I think
that could account in large part for why
we're seeing cancer at younger and
younger ages uh in these people. So
everything is related to our metabolic
homeostasis and the exposures that we're
getting for provocative agents that will
chronically disrupt oxidative
phosphorilation. H when we go back and
we think about the sociology and the
history of science piece of this that we
were talking about towards the
beginning, [snorts] it reminded me of
the saga of the diet heart hypothesis
and Anel Keys that many have talked
about in in the diet world where, you
know, long story short, you know, my
interpretation of all of that that I
share with many people is that, you
know, Ancel Keys's ideas became dominant
not because they won a scientific battle
on a level playing field, but largely
because uh of social and political
influence. fluence. The right people in
the right positions uh uh championed
those ideas. They suppressed alternative
ideas that they were competing against
through artificial means and those ideas
became enshrined at the level of public
policy such that for decades at a time,
you know, the the food pyramid and all
that stuff was constructed with this one
model being treated as unassalable fact
when in fact it was just one model that
never had uh a total true consensus
behind it. And I couldn't help but but
notice that in the Warberg cancer
biology saga that you told us about,
something similar happened where the
ideas weren't competing head-to-head on
a pure scientific basis, but they sort
of moved and became more prominent for
social and political reasons.
>> Yeah, I think so. Um, but this is the
nature of of the way we move forward. uh
uh and as I said during the Capernacian
revolution uh that was not taken lightly
uh by by the Catholic Church and other
other uh religious organizations. Um and
led to a lot of upheaval uh in in the
way uh people uh and and uh and the way
establishments viewed uh their position
in in in in the world. And I think I
think the the um paradigm shift for
cancer going from a from a genetic
disease uh to a mitochondrial metabolic
disease uh will have uh every bit of of
of of uh of tumultuous change as did the
[clears throat] capernician revolution
because if in those days it wasn't if
you thought the sun was the center of
the solar system or the earth whether
you dis agreed or disagreed it wasn't
associated with with 1,700 people a day
dying. Our misunderstanding of this
situation today uh uh that cancer is a
genetic disease is absolutely
responsible for the 1,700 people a day
dying. Those people are dying because
they're be being viewed as having
something other than what they have.
They do not have a genetic disease. So
these precision medicines that are all
based on the sematic mutation theory are
in are indirectly allowing the the the
field not to move forward. And as the
result, we're getting all these poor
people that are dying. So the
consequences of not knowing what you're
talking about scientifically have dire
dire consequences uh for people. The
suffering and death is enormous that
we're seeing with this cancer today. And
that's all because they refuse to accept
the war and the the the idea that this
is a mitochondrial metabolic disease.
Revenue generation is more important
than patient outcome. We know this for a
fact. The National Cancer Institute says
it's a genetic disease funding millions
of dollars in grant support on on a
flawed theory. So, we're getting more
and more dead people based on a lack of
knowledge or or ideological dogma uh
that's preventing the transition and and
th this is this is tragic, a tragedy of
greatest proportion. Mhm. So, so with
your view of mitochondrial metabolism
taking center stage in terms of cancer,
what are some of the best and simplest
ways people can manage their lives to
prevent cancer? Would you re would you
say that people should be um going into
ketosis one way or another, at least
intermittently, as part of their
strategy?
>> I I think so. And exercise plays a
session. All we're doing is bringing
ourselves back occasionally to the
Paleolithic period where cancer did not
was not prevalent. How do we know that
from the work of Albert Schwitzer
looking at tribes of people that live
according to their traditional ways? So,
so yes, I agree. I think that as long as
we are aware of what of what we need to
do and how to do it, then it becomes our
our job to to act upon that. Um but
right now I the misinformation
associated with with the food pyramids
and with the with what cancer is this
level of misinformation is causing a
tragic consequence to the health and
vitality of our population. So uh so
yeah we can prevent cancer if you can
keep your mitochondria healthy. It's
very hard to get cancer when
mitochondria healthy because
mitochondrial dysfunction is the origin
of cancer. So maintaining metabolic
homeostasis is absolutely essential for
preventing cancer and other chronic
diseases. So it's not bad luck. It's not
this crazy nonsense that you hear about
people talking about. It's our it's our
it's our diet lifestyle issues that
predominantly are responsible for our
our our health. But at least if we have
tools to put us into zones that we know
about, then it becomes up to us that we
have greater control over our destiny.
anything you want to reiterate or or any
final thoughts you want to leave people
with about what we discussed around
cancer and metabolism?
>> No, I think you know you you've done a
wonderful job uh getting down into the
nitty-gritty. Most folks that I talk
about on these podcasts uh we rarely
have an opportunity uh to go down into a
deeper uh a deeper level uh of our
understanding. You you you have to
realize that in our lab here at Boston
College, this is all we do. We discuss
these things day and night, night and
day. We have groups here. All we do is
sit around doing experiments, testing
our ideas, and discussing the concepts.
And we always looking for somebody who's
going to come at us with some piece of
evidence not consistent. And we look for
that's why we're offering a hundred
bucks. You show me a cancer cell that
can can I'll be more than happy to give
you the hundred bucks.
>> 100 bucks people. Yeah, $100. I'll give
you a thou my some of my friends will
give you a thousand bucks. So, so, so,
but but the issue is here we haven't had
any takers and with those who say that,
you know, we always find that there you
got plenty of fermentable fuels in your
environment. Get rid of that and see
what happens. Um, but but we're we're
testing all this and and and and the
other thing too is our research is
supported predominantly by private
foundations and philanthropy. So, we're
we we do what we think we need to do and
how to do it ourselves. Um, and and that
and you'd be surprised. This is a
revolution coming. This is a health
revolution that's on its way and it's
going to be restructured and it's going
to be open to the people and they're
going to know how to use this and the
law the better that we have the best
animal models of cancer all natural.
none of this artificial these
genetically constructed monstrosities,
patient derived zenographs, all these
these crazy things that think that that
you can get grants on but have very
little relevance to the real world. So
we always do everything naturally. We
have natural metastic cancer. We know
how metastatic cancer works. We know how
to stop metastatic cancer. We know how
to do all this because we have the
science behind us to do all this stuff.
and and as long as we get uh donations
from people who want to be part of the
movement, the transition, the paradigm
shift, whatever you want to call it,
they're excited about this. The future
is excited about this. So, so uh we're
moving in the right direction and and
and uh private foundations and
philanthropy are giving us the support
that we can do all this and I keep
publishing these papers in open access
journals so everybody can read the read
the papers. People ask me all these
questions. The answers are in the
papers. Please read the papers and
you'll get the answers. All right, Dr.
Thomas Caffrey, thank you very much for
your time. Oh, thank you very much.
[music]
Visit mind and matter.substack.com
to find all of my content. This episode
is supported in part by Athletic Greens.
Their main product, AG1, is a
comprehensive and convenient daily
nutrition product containing 75
vitamins, minerals, and whole food
sourced ingredients with less than one
gram of sugar per serving. No nasty
chemicals or artificial anything. It's
gluten and dairyf free and compatible
with paleo, vegan, vegetarian, and
ketogenic diets. AG1 is a quick and
convenient way to supplement your diet
to help ensure your body is getting the
nutrients it needs. It comes in powder
form and you can mix it in water and
drink it or you can put it into a
smoothie or a shake or something like
that. I mix it into water and drink it
and it's super convenient. If you go to
athletic greens.com/mindandmatter,
athletic greens will give you a free
one-year supply of vitamin D and five
free travel packs with your first
purchase. Their vitamin D product comes
in tincture form, so you just take one
drop each day. A large fraction of the
population is actually vitamin D
deficient, especially in winter months
when we get less sun exposure. And
vitamin D is super important for the
proper function of the immune system and
for a variety of other things. So visit
athleticgreens.com/minded
matter or click the link in the episode
description. You'll get a free 1-year
supply of vitamin D with your first
purchase.